[Docs] grt documentation (#3697)
The-OpenROAD-Project/OpenROAD: src/grt/README.md

# FastRoute

FastRoute is an open-source global router originally derived from Iowa State University's FastRoute4.1 algorithm.

## Commands

```{note}
- Parameters in square brackets `[-param param]` are optional.
- Parameters without square brackets `-param2 param2` are required.
```

### Global Route

```tcl
global_route 
    [-guide_file out_file]
    [-congestion_iterations iterations]
    [-congestion_report_file file_name]
    [-grid_origin {x y}]
    [-critical_nets_percentage percent]
    [-allow_congestion]
    [-verbose]
    [-start_incremental]

>     [-end_incremental]

Reviewer: I think this should match `help global_route`, ie., what is defined here: 
https://github.com/The-OpenROAD-Project/OpenROAD/blob/master/src/grt/src/GlobalRouter.tcl#L193-L204

If a flag/switch is deprecated, then please remove it from the `tcl` definition `sta::define_cmd_args`.

The same would apply to all commands and tools.

# Global Routing

> FastRoute is an open-source global router originally derived from Iowa State University's FastRoute4.1 algorithm.

Reviewer: See wording in `drt` PR.

## Commands

```{note}
- Parameters in square brackets `[-param param]` are optional.
- Parameters without square brackets `-param2 param2` are required.
```

### Global Route

```tcl
global_route 
    [-guide_file out_file]
    [-congestion_iterations iterations]
    [-congestion_report_file file_name]
    [-congestion_report_iter_step steps]
    [-grid_origin {x y}]
    [-critical_nets_percentage percent]
    [-allow_congestion]
    [-verbose]
    [-start_incremental]
    [-end_incremental]
```

#### Options

| Switch Name | Description | 
| ----- | ----- |

> | `-guide_file` | Set the output guides file name (e.g., `-guide_file route.guide`). |
> | `-congestion_iterations` | Set the number of iterations made to remove the overflow of the routing (e.g., `-congestion_iterations 50`) (default 50, integer). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `-guide_file` | Set the output guides file name (e.g., `route.guide`). |
| `-congestion_iterations` | Set the number of iterations made to remove the overflow of the routing. The default value is `50` and allowed values are integers `[1, MAX_INT]`.|
```

Reviewer: Repeat the format for other options. Filename options do not need to repeat the `-flag` and re-word default and allowed values.

| `-verbose` | This flag enables the full reporting of the global routing. |
| `-start_incremental` | This flag initializes the GRT listener to get the net modified (default not set). |
| `-end_incremental` | This flag run incremental GRT with the nets modified (default not set). |

### Set Routing Layers

```tcl
set_routing_layers 
    [-signal min-max]
    [-clock min-max]
```

#### Options

| Switch Name | Description |
| ----- | ----- |
| `-signal` | Set the min and max routing signal layer (names) in this format "%s-%s". |
| `-clock` | Set the min and max routing clock layer (names) in this format "%s-%s". |

Example: `set_routing_layers -signal Metal2-Metal10 -clock Metal6-Metal9`

### Set Macro Extension

```tcl
set_macro_extension extension
```

#### Options

| Argument Name | Description | 
| ----- | ----- |
| `extension` | Number of `GCells` added to the blockage boundaries from macros. A `GCell` is typically defined in terms of `Mx` routing tracks.  The default `GCell` size is 15 `M3` pitches. | 

Example: `set_macro_extension 2`

### Set Pin Offset

```tcl
set_pin_offset offset 
```

#### Options

| Argument Name | Description | 
| ----- | ----- |

> | `offset` | Pin offset in microns (must be positive AND integer). | 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `offset` | Pin offset in microns (must be a positive integer). | 
```

# Global Routing

The global routing module in OpenROAD (`grt`) is based on FastRoute, an
open-source global router originally derived from Iowa State University's
FastRoute4.1 algorithm.

## Commands

```{note}
- Parameters in square brackets `[-param param]` are optional.
- Parameters without square brackets `-param2 param2` are required.
```

### Global Route

```tcl
global_route 
    [-guide_file out_file]
    [-congestion_iterations iterations]
    [-congestion_report_file file_name]
    [-congestion_report_iter_step steps]
    [-grid_origin {x y}]
    [-critical_nets_percentage percent]
    [-allow_congestion]
    [-verbose]
    [-start_incremental]
    [-end_incremental]
```

#### Options

| Switch Name | Description | 
| ----- | ----- |

> | `-guide_file` | Set the output guides file name (e.g., `-guide_file route.guide`). |
> | `-congestion_iterations` | Set the number of iterations made to remove the overflow of the routing. The default value is `50`, and the allowed values are integers `[0, MAX_INT]`. |
> | `-congestion_report_file` | Set the file name to save congestion report. The file generated can be read by DRC viewer in the gui (e.g., `-congestion_report_file report_file.rpt`). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `-guide_file` | Set the output guides file name (e.g., `route.guide`). |
| `-congestion_iterations` | Set the number of iterations made to remove the overflow of the routing. The default value is `50`, and the allowed values are integers `[0, MAX_INT]`. |
| `-congestion_report_file` | Set the file name to save the congestion report. The file generated can be read by the DRC viewer in the GUI (e.g., `report_file.rpt`). |
```

and 1.0. When alpha is 0.0 the net topology minimizes total wirelength
(i.e. capacitance).  When alpha is 1.0 it minimizes longest path between
the driver and loads (i.e., maximum resistance).  Typical values are
0.4-0.8. You can call it multiple times for different nets.

```tcl
set_routing_alpha 
    [-net net_name] 

>     alpha

Reviewer: Missing `-min_fanout` and `-min_hpwl`.

```

#### Options

| Switch Name | Description | 
| ----- | ----- |
| `-seed` | Sets the random seed (must be non-zero for randomization). |
| `-capacities_perturbation_percentage` | Sets the percentage of edges whose capacities are perturbed. By default, the edge capacities are perturbed by adding or subtracting 1 (track) from the original capacity.  |
| `-perturbation_amount` | Sets the perturbation value of the edge capacities. This option is only meaningful when `-capacities_perturbation_percentage` is used. |

Example:
`set_global_routing_random -seed 42 \
  -capacities_perturbation_percentage 50 \
  -perturbation_amount 2`

### Repair Antennas

The `repair_antennas` command checks the global routing for antenna
violations and repairs the violations by inserting diodes near the
gates of the violating nets.  By default the command runs only one
iteration to repair antennas. Filler instances added by the
`filler_placement` command should NOT be in the database when
`repair_antennas` is called. 

```tcl
repair_antennas 
    [diode_cell]
    [-iterations iterations]
    [-ratio_margin margin]
```

#### Options

| Switch Name | Description |
| ----- | ----- |

> | `diode_cell` | Diode cell to fix antenna violations. |

Reviewer: `GlobalRouter.tcl` mentions `diode_port` as a valid argument. Has this changed @eder-matheus?

Reviewer 2: The `diode_port` is not necessary anymore. Only the cell is required. The `GlobalRouter.tcl` can be updated by removing the `/diode_port` part.

Reviewer: @luarss
Please remove `diode_port` from `tcl`.

| `-iterations` | Number of iterations (default 1, integer). |
| `-ratio_margin` | Add a margin to the antenna ratios (between 0 and 100, integer). |

See LEF/DEF 5.8 Language Reference, Appendix C, "Calculating and
Fixing Process Antenna Violations" for a [description](coriolis.lip6.fr/doc/lefdef/lefdefref/lefdefref.pdf) 
of antenna violations.

If no `diode_cell` argument is specified the LEF cell with class CORE, ANTENNACELL will be used.
If any repairs are made the filler instances are remove and must be
placed with the `filler_placement` command.

> If the LEF technology layer `ANTENNADIFFSIDEAREARATIO` properties are constant
> instead of PWL, inserting diodes will not improve the antenna ratios and thus, no
> diodes are inserted. The following warning message will be reported:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the LEF technology layer `ANTENNADIFFSIDEAREARATIO` properties are constant
instead of PWL, inserting diodes will not improve the antenna ratios, and thus, no
diodes are inserted. The following warning message will be reported:
```

```
[WARNING GRT-0243] Unable to repair antennas on net with diodes.
```

### Write Global Routing Guides

```tcl

> write_guides file_name

Reviewer: @eder-matheus is this correctly defined within the `odb.tcl`? Should we consider moving to `grt` tcl?

Reviewer 2: The `write_guides` command was initially implemented inside `grt` tcl, but we moved it to `odb.tcl` after having full support for guides in `odb`. IMO, it makes more sense to live in `odb`, since it is "independent" of `grt`.
E.g., we can call `write_guides ` even when `grt` did not run, like when we read the guides from a file.

```

| Switch Name | Description |
| ----- | ----- |
| `file_name` | Guide file name. |

Example: `write_guides route.guide`.

### Estimate Global Routing Parasitics

To estimate RC parasitics based on global route results, use the `-global_routing`

> option of the `estimate_parasitics` command.

Reviewer: @dralabeing
This is a `rsz` command but has a strong relation to `grt` (and also `gpl`). Where is it best to document such a case?
@luarss if we choose to document this here, we should add a similar section in `gpl` docs.

Reviewer 3: I think it should be documented in the resizer as is currently done and referenced through a link wherever it applies like in gpl, grt, repair design.. etc

```{note}
To see the function definition for `estimate_parasitics`, refer to 
[Resizer docs](../rsz/README.md#estimate-parasitics).
```

```tcl
estimate_parasitics -global_routing
```

### Plot Global Routing Guides

The `draw_route_guides` command plots the route guides for a set of nets.
To erase the route guides from the GUI, pass an empty list to this command:
`draw_route_guides {}`.

```tcl
draw_route_guides 
    net_names 
    [-show_pin_locations]
```

#### Options

| Switch Name | Description |
| ----- | ----- |

> | `net_names` | Tcl list of set of nets (e.g. {net1, net2}). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `net_names` | Tcl list of set of nets (e.g. `{net1, net2}`). |
```

| `-show_pin_locations` | Draw circles for the pin positions on the routing grid. |

### Report Wirelength

The `report_wire_length` command reports the wire length of the nets. Use the `-global_route`
and the `-detailed_route` flags to report the wire length from global and detailed routing,
respectively. If none of these flags are used, the tool will identify the state of the design
and report the wire length accordingly.

```tcl
report_wire_length 
    [-net net_list]
    [-file file]
    [-global_route]
    [-detailed_route]
    [-verbose]
```

#### Options

| Switch Name | Description | 
| ----- | ----- |

> | `net` | A list of nets. Use `*` to report the wire length for all nets of the design. |
> | `file` | The name of the file for the wire length report. |
> | `global_route` | This flag is used to report the wire length of the global routing. |
> | `detailed_route` | This flag is used to report the wire length of the detailed routing. |
> | `verbose` | This flag enables the full reporting of the wire length information. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `-net` | List of nets to report the wirelength. Use `*` to report for all nets of the design. |
| `-file` | The name of the file for the wirelength report. |
| `-global_route` | Report the wirelength of the global routing. |
| `-detailed_route` | Report the wirelength of the detailed routing. |
| `-verbose` | This flag enables the full reporting of the wire length information. |
```

Reviewer: @eder-matheus, what does "full reporting" in the `-verbose` actually mean? Which additional info is reported?

Reviewer 2: Here's an example of the report with and without the `-verbose` flag:
<img width="605" alt="image" src="https://github.com/The-OpenROAD-Project/OpenROAD/assets/43450810/b7a6d867-a42b-41b0-abcc-1d166b09e08d">

In summary, the `-verbose` gives details of the wire length per routing layer.

Reviewer: @luarss 
Please make this distinction clear on what the `-verbose` flag adds to the report.

Example: `report_wire_length -net {clk net60} -global_route -detailed_route -verbose -file out.csv`

### Debug Mode

The `global_route_debug` command allows you to start a debug mode to view the status of the Steiner Trees.
It also allows you to dump the input positions for the Steiner tree creation of a net.
This must be used before calling the `global_route` command. 
Set the name of the net and the trees that you want to visualize.

```tcl
global_route_debug 
    [-st]
    [-rst]
    [-tree2D]
    [-tree3D]
    [-saveSttInput file_name]
    [-net net_name]
```

#### Options

| Switch Name | Description |
| ----- | ----- |

> | `st` | Show the Steiner Tree generated by stt. |
> | `rst` | Show the Rectilinear Steiner Tree generated by FastRoute. |
> | `tree2D` | Show the Rectilinear Steiner Tree generated by FastRoute after the overflow iterations. |
> | `tree3D` | Show the 3D Rectilinear Steiner Tree post-layer assignment. |
> | `saveSttInput` | Set the file name to save stt input of a net. |
> | `net` | Set the name of the net name to be displayed. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `-st` | Show the Steiner Tree generated by `stt`. |
| `-rst` | Show the Rectilinear Steiner Tree generated by `grt`. |
| `-tree2D` | Show the Rectilinear Steiner Tree generated by `grt` after the overflow iterations. |
| `-tree3D` | Show the 3D Rectilinear Steiner Tree post-layer assignment. |
| `-saveSttInput` | File name to save `stt` input of a net. |
| `-net` | The name of the net name to be displayed. |
```

```shell
./test/gcd.tcl
```

### Read Global Routing Guides

```tcl
read_guides file_name 
```

#### Options

| Switch Name | Description |
| ----- | ----- |
| `file_name` | Path to global routing guide. | 

### Useful developer functions

If you are a developer, you might find these useful. More details can be found in the [source file](./src/GlobalRouter.cpp) or the [swig file](./src/GlobalRouter.i).

```tcl 
check_routing_layer layer  # check if the layer is within the min/max routing layer specified.
parse_layer_name layer_name # get routing layer number from layer name
parse_layer_range cmd layer_range # parses a range from layer_range argument of format (%s-%s). cmd argument
                                        is not used. 
check_region lower_x lower_y upper_x upper_y # checks the defined region if its within the die area.
define_layer_range layers # provide a Tcl list of layers and automatically generate the min and max layers for signal routing.
define_clock_layer_range layers # provide a Tcl list of layers and automatically generate the min and max layers for clock routing.
have_detailed_route block # checks if block has detailed route already.

> ```

Reviewer: Make it a table.

## Regression tests

There are a set of regression tests in `/test`. For more information, refer to this [section](../../README.md#regression-tests). 

Simply run the following script: 

```shell
./test/regression
```

## Limitations

## Using the Python interface to grt

```{warning}
The `Python` interface is currently in development and is subject to change.
```

The `Python` API tries to stay close to the API defined in the `C++` class
`GlobalRouter` that is located [here](./include/grt/GlobalRouter.h)

When initializing a design, a sequence of `Python` commands might look like
the following:

```python
from openroad import Design, Tech
tech = Tech()
tech.readLef(...)
design = Design(tech)
design.readDef(...)
gr = design.getGlobalRouter()
```    

> Here are some options to the `globalRoute`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are some options for the `global_route`
```
